Hello, everyone.
Welcome back to Exploring Quantum Physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
In this part, we're going to look at
the properties of Fermi-Dirac particles.
This is a subject that is the foundation
of chemistry and materials physics,
has been known as such for a long time.
But only in the past decade or so has it
become possible to explore it directly
with great controllability and
observability in gaseous systems, and
that's led to a number of
exciting new developments.
Now we're going to look at the other part
of the world, the fermion sector, and
what happens as Fermi gases get cold.
This investigation was started by Fermi
just a year or so after Einstein thought
of his theory of the ideal gas, and
Fermi took a very similar approach.
Start with an ideal gas, then construct
the quantum states of motion.
But now, the big difference from
Einstein's theory is that Fermi suggested
that one look at an alternative quantum
hypothesis from many particle systems,
which is that no more than one
atom can occupy any given state.
This is now the prescription for
what we call Fermi-Dirac statistics,
and the particles that obey
the statistics are fermions, the electron,
the proton, the neutron.
In fact, ordinary matter is made up of
fermions if you have pairs of fermions
that are boson, but nevertheless,
the fundamental particles that
are most important for our lives
with massive particles are fermions.
And then he calculated the properties
of gas in thermal equilibrium.
In particular,
Fermi used the construction,
which is rather different to what
you find in modern textbooks.
He takes the atoms and
puts them in a three dimensional
harmonic oscillator potential.
His original paper in English translation
to be found in additional materials,
it's very short, very beautifully written,
and anyone can benefit from looking at it.
Anyway, this hypothesis that no more than
one atom can occupy a given quantum state
thereby results in a very different low
temperature limit than we have for bosons.
So for bosons, we have Bose–Einstein
condensation, and all atoms go
into the ground state of the system when
the quantum degeneracy regime is attained.
That is when the phase based
density is greater than 1.
For fermions on the other hand, so now,
this diagram taken from
Marcus Griner is a cartoon
of what happens for the system of fermions
with two spin states, one up and one down.
The way Fermi treated it,
you just consider one of
these families as a fermion.
Let's say the spin one, spin up.
So if you take the spin up, if you have
spin up particles, then you have to
load up all the levels of the trap until
you exhaust the number of particles.
And that means that the zero temperature
state has a very high total energy.
So, as you approach zero
temperature from above,
what happens is you form
this hard wall of fermions.
And you can't make the system any
colder by removing the energetic atoms
because the zero temperature state
has all these levels occupied.
There are so many important
implications of Fermi's idea.
I mean, basically all of chemistry depends
upon what's called the Pauli exclusion
principle, which is that you
can only have one electron per
quantum state or two per quantum
state if you have both spins.
One of the most astonishing things for me
is this limit named after Chandrasekhar.
It is a stunningly beautiful equation.
You can read more about it
in Chandrasekhar's paper,
which is included in additional materials.
The paper's not about this limit, but
our narrative has something about it.
This is a wonderful equation because
it incorporates the Planck constant
with the stance for quantum mechanics,
the speed of light,
which is relativity, and the gravitational
constant, which is gravity.
This is, if you remember, Victor's diagram
of the different dimensions of physical
theory covered in this first lecture.
This has got something
from each one of them.
And what it is,
it expresses the maximum mass
that a star can have and still be stable.
And when this was first published
in the scientific literature, and
I think Chandrasekhar was 19 years old
when he wrote this expression out,
it shocked the astronomy
community because it implied that
there would be run away collapse,
an existence of black holes.
Because you can always add more matter
to the star just by stellar collision or
something, gravitational
attraction will enable you to
load as much matter onto
a star as you possibly can.
But Chandrasekhar showed that with
the Fermi statistics that provide
the support against gravity,
there's a critical mass beyond which
one would get gravitational collapse.
The actual construction,
and this is by Fermi,
of an ideal gas of fermions in
a harmonic trap was realized in 1999,
just a few years after Bose–Einstein
condensation was attained.
And it was done with a system
about a million potassium atoms,
a million atoms the isotope potassium-40
in a 3D harmonic oscillator trap,
which reminds me,
I've been meaning to ask you something.
Right, so I hope you figured out
why potassium-40 is a fermion.
It's a composite particle made up of
an odd number of bosons, 59 in total.
And so
this is a schematic of the experiment,
very similar in approach to
the others that we've described,
additional details of a preparation
chamber in a so-called science chamber.
But again, the system is consist
of a magneto optical trap, and
then the imaging is done in the same way,
so the shadow image of light
coming through the atoms and
being resolved by a CCD camera.
And the key finding in this experiment was
an evaporative cooling curve, so there's
a process of cooling by evaporating
the potassium atoms from the trap,
that evaporative cooling is discussed
in a very easily accessible way
in Eric Cornell's paper, Bose–Einstein
Condensation, in our additional materials.
And what you find is that it becomes
progressively harder to evaporatively cool
as you approach the Fermi temperature.
In fact,
there's sort of a limit is reached.
And this is, again, because in evaporative
cooling, what you're doing is taking,
you have in the trap, you have lots
of hot atoms as well floating around.
And you cut them away and then there's
a re-thermalization, which means that
the temperature goes down because you've
taken the hot material out of the system.
So that leads to cooling, but
when you get down to the Fermi,
near the Fermi temperature, you're just
removing atoms away from the Fermi level,
so they are more energetic, but
they're not thermally excited.
They just happen to be
the high line state.
So basically, it becomes very hard to
cool fermion atoms compared to bosons.
Well, here is an approach to cooling
fermions that goes below that limit.
This is an absolutely wonderful
experiment from a technical standpoint.
It involves trapping two isotopes
of lithium in the same trap.
This is, by the way, made possible by
the isotope shift in atomic energy
levels that we discussed on several
occasions earlier in the course.
Well, that reminds me, there's
something I've been wanting to ask you.
So here is the answer,
Lithium 7 is the boson
because it's a composite
made out of ten fermions.
Lithium 6 is the fermion that's
a composite made out of nine fermions.
And so you see in this sequence of images,
here is the cooling that's
going on from top to bottom.
The two clouds are very similar
at high temperatures, but
as you drop the temperature, you can see
that you get a much colder cloud and
more dense on the bosonic side
than on the fermion side.
So, that shows a difference in cooling
properties between fermions and bosons.
And we can also take a look at
the problem from another angle.
For many years, there's been
discussion about the connection between
superconductivity and
Bose–Einstein condensation.
So, one simplistic view is that
the Cooper pairs of electrons
that are responsible for
superconductivity are a composite boson
and so superconductivity is sort of like
the condensation of the Bose
condensation of Cooper pairs.
But now, the connection between these
two can be mapped out in detail in
ultra cold atom systems.
In a superconductor, we just have
the electrons and the temperature,
we can't really vary the pairing
interaction in a controllable way.
When a system of ultra cold atoms,
in this case, Lithium 6,
as was discussed in the previous slide,
the interaction
energy between atoms can be
modified by a Feshbach resonance.
Effectively, it's a sort
of a resonant process
of increasing the strength of pairing
between the atoms in the example.
So, in this case, one is looking
at a phase diagram, pressure,
as a function of the interaction
energy that's varied.
And one can move between the BCS
regime of superconductivity
of pairs of loosely bound pairs of
electrons or pairs of atoms here.
But the Cooper pairs, as discussed in
Victor's lecture, reside in this regime.
And then by increasing
the interaction potential,
one can move into the BEC region,
where now you have basically dimers
formed of these fermionic atoms.
And they become like a composite boson,
and so
you see Bose-Einstein condensation there.
So, we'll conclude with
a very brief survey
of the state of the art in quantum gasses
in the final part of this lecture.